WESTCHESTER COUNTY PLANNING DEPARTMENT BUDGET - 2023
================================================================================

Source: westchester_county_2023_operating_budget.pdf
Pages: 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220
================================================================================


--- PAGE 215 ---

Department Of Law (18)
the administration and operation of a duly licensed and accredited 1)Grasslands/Radio Tower Cooling System
health sciences college or university.
2)Labs and Research/Uninterruptable Power Supply
? Provided extensive legal advice and services to the Westchester
Community College in connection with alleged fraudulent uses of
3)County Center/Emergency Electrical Services
student's credit cards, including but not limited to researching the
New York Gen Bus Law ? 899-aa, a/k/a the Stop Hacks and Improve
4)Airport/Storm Drain Replacement
Electronic Data Security Act (the ?SHIELD Act?), which imposes
affirmative obligations onto an entity in connection with an electronic
5)Ossining Wastewater Plant/Main Power Feed Replacement
systems breach. Legal advice was also provided in connection with
revisions to the College's credit card policies and procedures in order
6)Emergency Hauling of Hurricane Debris.
to make them become Payment Card Industry Data Security
Standard (PCI) compliant.
? Assisted the Department of Environmental Facilities with
? Provided legal advice, drafted and negotiated multiple funding procurement of an agreement to begin a Textile Collection and
agreements and IMAs with counsel for the New York State Recycling Program. This program will increase the amount of
Department of Environmental Conservation, New York State material removed from the County's solid waste stream.
Environmental Facilities Corporation and City of Mt. Vernon in
? Assisted the Department of Environmental Facilities to create a Food
connection with the funding, design and construction of sanitary
Waste Collection Program. This involved drafting IMAs with various
sewer and storm sewer system improvements within the City of Mt.
municipalities and authorizing legislation to collect such waste on
Vernon.
behalf of local municipalities at a subsidized rate, as well as
? Participated in extensive discussions and consideration with the procuring an agreement with a contractor to transport and dispose
Department of Information Technology, and provided legal advice, the food waste. Through this program, the County may potentially
related to the procurement and future implementation of electronic remove up to 22% of waste from the solid waste stream and turn it
signatures for contracts, which could be used in order to simplify and into mulch and/or energy.
expedite those processes.
? Assisted the Planning Department to amend an agreement with the
? Assisted Department of Environmental Facilities in negotiating, New York State Department of Environmental Conservation for the
drafting and working on an easement agreement with ARCO design of the Mamaroneck and Sheldrake Rivers Flood Risk
Remediation LLC for sewer upgrade work at the Anaconda Reduction Project. This project will address chronic flooding in
Superfund site, including attendance at meetings with the Village of southern Westchester.
Hastings-on-Hudson and the New York State Department of
? Provided legal advice and assistance to the County Executive Office,
Environmental Conservation.
in connection with the negotiation of agreements with Community
? Assisted the Commissioner of Emergency Services in the Capital New York, for the transfer of American Rescue Plan Act funds
preparation of an RFP to solicit proposals from EMS agencies to to certain local businesses and not for profit corporations grantees
provide supplemental EMS coverage in the County. affected by the COVID-19 pandemic who qualified under the
Business FIRST and the Launch1000 Programs.
? Assisted the Departments of Public Works and Transportation, and
Environmental Facilities to respond to several emergencies created ? Provided legal advice and assistance to the Department of Parks,
by natural disasters and other causes, by preparing emergency Recreation and Conservation, in connection with the negotiation of a
declarations and the related contracts to address the following: management agreement for the renovation and operation of an
C-159


--- PAGE 216 ---

Department Of Law (18)
existing restaurant building facility, formerly known as La Cantina ? Attend monthly meetings with senior DSS staff to review ongoing
Restaurant, at the County's V.E. Macy Park, located in Irvington, New matters;
York, as a modern American grill restaurant.
? Provides input into agency policies and legislation;
? Provided legal advice and assistance to the Department of
? Assist DSS with issues involving compliance with court orders,
Community Mental Health, in connection with the negotiation of
expediting provision of services, guidance on agency policies, federal
contracts and the implementation of eight (8) Mobile Crisis Response
and state regulations, immigration issues, and other issues affecting
Teams, comprised of specialized trained staff with experience in
permanency and the well-being of children. The FCB obtains court
addressing mental health, developmental disabilities, substance
orders and legal documents to support claims for federal and state
abuse and co-occurring issues which do not involve known threats of
reimbursement for foster care and adoption; and
violence or medical emergencies, in order to address and assist
police in addressing a wide range of behavioral health related crisis ? Member of both the County's Child Fatality Review and the Multi-
including conflict resolution, suicide threats, wellness checks, Disciplinary Teams.
substance misuse, and more, relying on a trauma-informed
? Child Support
deescalation and harm reduction techniques. This initiative (?Project
Alliance Initiative?) is part of the County's far reaching plan to ? The FCB provides representation at child support proceedings to
?Reimagine Policing? in Westchester County. DSS and private petitioners under both the Uniform Interstate Family
Support Act (UIFSA) and Section 111-g of the New York State Social
CHILDREN AND FAMILY SERVICES Services Law;
Family Court Bureau (FCB) ? Initiates thousands of proceedings against non-custodial parents who
Child Welfare fail to meet child support obligations owed either directly to the
County or to individual custodial parents;
? FCB provides legal services for all Department of Social Services ? Establish paternity to seek initial support orders;
(DSS) child welfare district offices.
? Modify existing support orders;
? Responsible for representing DSS in child welfare proceedings in the
? Prosecute non-custodial parents who willfully fail to meet their
County's three Family Courts;
support obligations;
? Presents cases on behalf of DSS in Family Court, Supreme Court
? Present Uniform Interstate Child Support cases in Family Court on
and before administrative tribunals;
behalf of out-of-state custodial parent petitioners who are seeking to
? Represents DSS in child abuse and neglect cases, multi-disciplinary establish paternity and obtain child support from Westchester
team cases, extensions of placement, termination of parental rights, residents.
foster care review approvals, kinship guardianship, adoptions, fair
Juvenile Justice
hearings, orders of protection and custody and visitation and court
ordered investigations;
? Investigates and present juvenile delinquency, juvenile offender and
? Handles Persons In Need of Supervision (PINS) matters and
adolescent offender cases and extensions on behalf of the people of
extensions involving DSS;
Westchester County in Family Court;
? Responsible for providing legal advice and training to all child welfare
? Prosecute violations of probation in Family Court on behalf of the
program areas;
Department of Probation (DOP);
C-160


--- PAGE 217 ---

Department Of Law (18)
? Provide information to victims of youth crime on available community- the FCB participated in National Night Out Against Crime events
based services, including counseling, crisis intervention and safety throughout the County.
planning;
Diversion Services
? Maintain a network of community based and county agencies who
can help to provide diversion services for juvenile justice involved ? Diversion programs are alternatives to initial or continued formal
youth to be held accountable without disrupting their ability to lead processing of youth in the juvenile delinquency system. The FCB has
productive lives and contribute to their community; worked with various Youth Courts and mediation programs to divert
cases from formal prosecution in 2022. The FCB has expanded its
? Serve as a liaison and collaborate with various community based
partnerships with community based programs in order to meet more
service providers, juvenile justice stakeholders on issues involving
of the needs of our court involved youth and to off ramp them from
juvenile delinquency;
form prosecution and perhaps deeper into the justice system. One
? Provide legal training to DOP on violations and various police such endeavor was the partnership with the Mount Vernon Police
departments throughout Westchester at in-service training; and Department in forming their own Youth Court. In 2022, the FCB was
instrumental in helping to get this Youth Court operational and has
? Review certain DOP procedures to ensure compliance with state and
recently used the program for diversion services.
federal law. Respond to all requests for formal opinions regarding
probation issues. Victim's Services
Specific Accomplishments:
? In 2022, the FCB was successful in collaborating with community
based partners such as WESTCOP and other county agencies to
2022 Ongoing Initiatives: Updates
expand the network of services offered to victims of youth crime,
including, but not limited to: safety planning, therapeutic
Community Outreach interventions, assistance with victim services applications, medical
bills and counseling expenses, lost wages and other types of
? In 2021, the FCB established a community outreach program and in assistance. The Bureau is now able to routinely refer crime victims
2022 endeavored to expand the program that involves a long-term, for services.
proactive partnerships among the Law Department, law enforcement,
Youth Part Collaboration
the community and public and private organizations. The purpose is
to use the authority of the FCB to solve problems, improve public
? Over the past few years, the FCB implemented the groundbreaking
safety and enhance the quality of life of community members.
Raise the Age legislation incorporating youths who are 16 and 17
Community out-reach represents a distinct departure from the case
years old youths into the juvenile justice practice and worked closely
and conviction orientation of traditional prosecution. Instead,
with all stakeholders. The FCB endeavors to work in conjunction with
community outreach initiatives seek ways to prevent and reduce
the Westchester County District Attorney's Office to develop a plan to
youth crime and improve public safety. This past year the FCB has
screen and draft cases involving youth who are accused of felony
presented at various schools and community network meetings. It
crimes. Since the vast majority of Youth Part County Court cases are
has also formulated partnerships with various Youth Courts and was
transferred to Family Court, the FCB endeavors to have early access
instrumental in aiding the Mt. Vernon Po-lice Department with
to these cases and, when appropriate, draft and appear in the Youth
designing their own Youth Court. Additionally, the child support, child
Part prior to transfer. This will ensure that the proper charges are
welfare and juvenile justice teams presented to stakeholders at the
drafted and the transfer occurs expeditiously and efficiently. In 2022,
County's Domestic Violence Counsel. In 2022, for the second year,
the County Attorney's Office and the County District Attorney's Office
C-161


--- PAGE 218 ---

Department Of Law (18)
have formulated a memorandum of understanding to outline the 2021. This act reforms the federal child welfare financing streams,
parameters of the collaboration and we are hopeful it will be Title IV-E and Title IV-B of the Social Security Act, to provide services
implemented in 2022. Even without the formal agreement, the FCB to families who are at risk of entering the child welfare system. The
has appeared in the Youth Part many times in 2022 in order to aid the bill aims to prevent children from entering foster care by allowing
Court. federal reimbursement for mental health services, substance use
treatment, and in-home parenting skill training. It also seeks to
Juvenile Delinquency Discovery
improve the well-being of children already in foster care by
incentivizing states to reduce placement of children in congregate
? On April 1, 2019, New York State passed sweeping criminal justice
care. In the New York implementation of the act, the Family Courts
reform legislation, including discovery reform, requiring prosecutors
are now charged with additional duties to review the congregate
to disclose their evidence to the defense earlier in case proceedings.
placements. This review has added additional court appearances
The discovery reforms went into effect January 1, 2020 and were
and litigation in both the child welfare and juvenile justice areas. In
amended in April 2020. Similarly, the New York State legislature is
addition, the FCB has trained and worked with the Department of
proposing a similar bill for juvenile delinquency proceedings that will
Social Services on the new law.
affect the FCB significantly. The reformed law requires significantly
greater openness and establishes specific timeframes for the sharing 2023 New Initiatives
of evidence between the Presentment Agency and defense during
the pretrial period. As a result of the prior legislation, District Cross Over Youth Initiative
Attorney's Offices created electronic and digitized methods for
dealing with the volume of evidence and the ensuing disclosures to ? The Crossover Youth Practice Model (CYPM) is a multi-agency,
defense counsel. In 2022, in anticipation of the change in law and cross-system practice model that aims to address the needs of youth
based upon the FCB's close collaboration with the District Attorney's involved in both child welfare and juvenile justice systems. Its core
office regarding Youth Part cases, the FCB, the Information goal is to reduce further youth involvement in the juvenile justice
Technology Department and the District Attorney's Office have system in a manner that is consistent with the needs and best
collaborated to develop a digital discovery process for juvenile interests of the youth and the need for the protection of the
delinquency cases using a portal to collect and distribute discovery. community. The FCB will endeavor to begin a CYPM model in
Westchester County by engaging the Department of Social Service,
Training Opportunities
the Department of Probation and the family court system to create a
model, which seeks to achieve the following four overarching goals:
? Throughout 2021 and 2022, the FCB continued to provide extensive
training for attorneys, continual updates on judicial decisions and 1.Reduction in the number of youth crossing over and becoming
changes in the law and ongoing training for all legal staff, including dually-involved;
training in ethical responsibilities. The FCB instituted a monthly
Lunch and Learn series which has covered numerous topics 2.Reduction in the number of youth placed in out-of-home care;
throughout the year. The FCB will continue to develop additional
training opportunities for both attorneys and support staff. In 2022, 3.Reduction in the use of congregate care; and
the FCB has already completed seven separate trainings.
4.Reduction in the disproportionate representation of youth of
Family First Legislation
color, particularly in the crossover population
? The Family First Prevention Services Act was signed into law as part
Risk Management and OSHA Safety Standards
of the bipartisan budget act and went into effect in New York in late
C-162


--- PAGE 219 ---

Department Of Law (18)
? Coordinates and monitors the County's Property and Casualty Self ? Develops, coordinates, oversees and plans training and drills for
Insurance Program with the County Attorney's Office, Budget evacuation plans for all facilities where County employees reside.
Department and Finance Office.
? Evaluates new and emerging risk exposures and recommends the
? Participates in the administration of the County's Self Insurance needed insurance, and risk management measures.
Programs and 6N Fund, including reserves established for funding
Specific Accomplishments
self-insured losses and/or self insured retentions and deductibles.
? Administers the processing of all losses and claims, both insured and ? To significantly reduce the County's incurred premiums, facilitate
self insured, under the Risk Management program. insurance renewal programs and ensure the County received
? Establishes and maintains working relationships with consultants, improved carrier and broker underwriting and claims handling on a
going-forward basis, the Fine Arts, Crime and Westchester
insurance brokers, carriers agents, actuaries and auditors regarding
Community College Auto Insurance programs were restructured
the County's Risk Management Program.
during Fiscal Year 2022. Specifically, the various Fine Arts and
? Maintains a Risk Management tracking system for all 6N claims Playland Carousel & Organ policies were bundled by placing them
against the County. under 2 separate Fine Arts policies, the stand-alone crime policy was
? Creates and prepares all reports utilizing data systems for the rolled under our New York Municipal Insurance Reciprocal (NYMIR)
Property program, the Westchester Community College Auto policy
purposes of cost analysis and actuarial processes.
was cancelled and the corresponding vehicles that were thereunder
? Reviews and evaluates all County contracts for compliance with were rolled under the County's Paratransit motor vehicle policy.
insurance and indemnity and hold harmless requirements.
REVENUES:
? Monitors and negotiates the insurance needs of the County: i.e. as it
relates to its property and boiler, Liberty Lines Buses, Business ? Departmental Revenues consist of charges to the 6-N Fund, to
Automobile, Aviation, Hull Protection and Indemnity, Crime, Sewer, Water, Refuse Disposal District Funds and the Westchester
Volunteer, Fine Arts, Builder's Risk, Cyber Security, Flood, and Community College Fund for legal services.
Special Events exposures ? Interdepartmental Revenue received from those departments for
? Evaluates and monitors coverage issues pertaining to the County's which the Law Department performs required legal service. These
Para Transit and small bus fleet. charges are made by hourly rates derived from the Law Department's
operating costs, which are adjusted annually.
? Coordinates and negotiates the placement of special insurance
needs of the County as they arise.
? Coordinates the subrogation collections for damage to County owned
property.
? Manages the motor vehicle abstracts and reviews applications of
County employees eligible to operate a County vehicle pursuant to
County policy.
? Risk reduction and training, OSHA management, reporting,
inspections, remediation, fire safety program, building inspections
and safety training.
C-163


--- PAGE 220 ---

Department Of Law (18)
COUNTY ATTORNEY SERVICE INDICATORS: RISK MANAGEMENT SERVICE INDICATORS:
2021 2022 2023
Actual Estimated Planned
2021 2022 2023
Number of Cases:
Actual Estimated Planned
Litigation Matters 4,614 4,599 4,623
New Claims Investigated:*
Appeals, Opinions and
Medical Malpractice 5 4 5
Legislation 2,508 2,634 2,739
General Liability 142 165 150
Contracts and Real Estate 11,974 12,500 12,600
Automobile Liability 27 35 30
Family Court:
Auto Liability Liberty Lines 172 180 180
JD Extensions 200 200 200
Para Trans/Bus Events 33 55 40
Guardianships 180 180 180
Property Claims 17 15 20
Juvenile Delinquency cases 600 700 775
Third Party Insurance
Juvenile Delinquency RTA
Recoveries $335,000 $360,000 $100,000
Cases (implementation Oct
Subrogation Claims Closed 140 150 50
2018) 100 200 200
Contracts Reviewed 2,328 2,500 2,600
Pins and Pins Extension 75 80 85
Driver Abstracts Reviewed 4,670 4,800 4,700
Safety related in-services/
meetings held 30 55 155
Abuse and Neglect matters 2,500 2,700 2,800 Volunteers Processed 634 650 675
Violations of Probation 30 50 Settled Claims 35 40 40
Legal Consultation 300 350 400 No Fault Transactions 17 35 25
Court Ordered Insurance Policies Procured 17* 15**
Investigations 1,500 1,500 1,500
*Amongst other policies, this count includes 2 Builders Risk policies, 1 WCC Auto
Child Support matters 14,400 14,400 14,500 policy, and multiple Fine Arts policies that were in effect approximately the first 2
Custody Appearances 520 550 560 quarters of FY22. It should be noted that during the 2nd quarter, we eliminated
the WCC auto policy and rolled the WCC vehicles under our paratransit policy,
Subpoenas, Warrant
bundled crime coverage under our property policy, and combined our Fine Arts
Reviews 460 500 500
policies, including coverage for our Carousel and Organ, thereby reducing our
Expungements/Fair
final count of policies to 13 post the 2nd quarter of FY22.
Hearings 450 450 450
Permanency 1,600 1,800 2,000 ** Currently not expected to increase our count of policies in FY23, unless the
Total Family Court Cases 22,885 23,640 24,500 cyber liability insurance market softens thereby allowing us to purchase excess
cyber liability insurance, and/or we elect to secure a stand-alone Volunteer
Pollution and Professional Liability insurance coverage for our HazMat
Total Cases 41,981 43,373 44,462 Volunteers.
C-164

