WESTCHESTER COUNTY PLANNING DEPARTMENT BUDGET - 2025
================================================================================

Source: westchester_county_2025_operating_budget.pdf
Pages: 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219
================================================================================


--- PAGE 214 ---

Department Of Law (18)
agencies and municipalities to implement its various senior services Children and Family Services (?OCFS?) and administer such funds
programs. on behalf of the OCGS and implement youth programs through
municipalities and not-for-profits under the following funding streams:
? Provided legal advice, drafted legislation, resolutions and
(i) Youth Development Program funds; (ii) Runaway and Homeless
agreements for the County's STOP-DWI Office in connection with
Youth Act funding; and (iii) the newly created program entitled ?Youth
various programs designed to prevent alcohol-related driving
Sports and Educational Opportunity Funding.?
accidents and educate youth on the dangers of DWI.
? Assisted the Department of Information and Technology in preparing
? Assisted the Director of Tourism & Film in the presentation of
a County Policy for the Appropriate Use of Generative Artificial
contracts with various advertising and public relations firms to
Intelligence (AI)-Based Tools.
promote tourism and film production in the County.
? Assisted the Department of Planning with the planning and
? Assisted the Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation in
negotiation of an intermunicipal agreement (?IMA?) with the City of
negotiating an agreement and drafting legislation to authorize the
Yonkers for the construction of a park by the Hudson River for the
grant of permanent and temporary easements to Clean Path New
benefit of all County Residents. Pursuant to the IMA, the County will
York LLC to lay and maintain high voltage electrical lines over and
pay up to a not-to-exceed amount of $15,000,000 for the construction
under Croton Point Park. This will facilitate the construction of a
of the park improvements, and will convey a parcel 0.4 acres in size
proposed 1,300 megawatt high voltage direct current transmission
to the City of Yonkers. This collaboration between the City of
project that will run underground and underwater for approximately
Yonkers, which has already invested $13,000,000.00 in the
178 miles from Delhi, New York to Queens, New York. The project
acquisition of several parcels, and the County of Westchester, which
will deliver power from new wind and solar generation facilities in
has agreed to finance a significant portion of the park improvements,
upstate New York directly to New York City, providing the city with
will require bonding legislation, property conveyance and an
approximately 15% of its annual electricity consumption.
agreement with the City of Yonkers, so that all County residents can
? Provided legal advice and assistance to the Department of enjoy another waterfront park in Westchester County.
Community Mental Health, in connection with the renewal of
? Assisted with agreements with the law firms of Hawkins, Delafield &
contracts for the continuation of eight (8) Mobile Crisis Response
Wood LLP, Norton Rose Fulbright US LLP, Harris Beach PLLC and
Teams, comprised of specialized trained staff with experience in
Bryant Rabbino LLP, for the provision of bond counsel services to the
addressing mental health, developmental disabilities, substance
County of Westchester in an ?of counsel? capacity to the County
abuse and co-occurring issues which do not involve known threats of
Attorney, on an ?as-needed? basis, for the period commencing
violence or medical emergencies, in order to address and assist
August 1, 2024 through July 31, 2027, with a County option to renew
police in addressing a wide range of behavioral health related crisis
the term of each of the agreements for one additional two-year
including conflict resolution, suicide threats, wellness checks,
period.
substance misuse, and more, relying on a trauma-informed
deescalation and harm reduction techniques. This initiative (?Project ? Provided legal advice and assistance to the Department of Finance
Alliance Initiative?) is part of the County's far reaching plan to to collect delinquent license and utility fees due the County from
?Reimagine Policing? in Westchester County. commercial carriers and Entergy Nuclear Operations, Inc./Holtec
Decommissioning International, LLC.
? Assisted the County Youth Bureau Office in preparing agreement
templates and drafting legislation and resolutions in connection with ? Provided legal advice and assistance to the Department of Public
the submission to the State of New York (the ?State?) by the County of Works in establishing an EV Charging Station joint improvement
a resource allocation plan (the ?Plan?) which will qualify the County to program with local municipalities.
receive certain State reimbursements through the State's Office of
C-164


--- PAGE 215 ---

Department Of Law (18)
? Provided legal advice and drafting services to the Office of the approvals, kinship, guardianship, adoptions, fair hearings, orders of
County Executive, working in conjunction with the Department of protection, PINS cases and custody and visitation and court ordered
Public Safety to negotiate and draft the service agreement with the investigations.
vendor to implement the County's new School Bus Stop Arm
? Appeared on behalf of DSS in permanency hearings, juvenile
Demonstration Program, to protect children who are entering and
delinquency proceedings and other child welfare proceedings in the
exiting school buses.
Westchester Family Court, Supreme Court and administrative
? Provided legal advice and assistance to the Board of Elections to tribunals.
enter into facility use agreements with polling places in connection
? FCB attorneys work collaboratively with DSS-Division of Child
with the upcoming Primary, Special and General Elections.
Protection and other child welfare specialists to further the agency's
? Provided legal advice and drafting services to the Department of mission to protect children and youth and improve the lives of
Public Safety to enter into IMA's with municipalities to distribute 300- families.
500 mobile radios for local police vehicles for the purpose of
? Attorneys provide general legal assistance/advice for DSS.
providing County-wide radio communication channel(s) for
incidences that cross jurisdiction lines. ? Responsible for providing legal advice and training to all child welfare
program areas.
CHILDREN AND FAMILY SERVICES
? Attends monthly meetings with senior DSS staff to review ongoing
Family Court Bureau (FCB) matters.
? Provides input into agency policies and legislation.
? The Family Court Bureau has three main areas of responsibility-child
? Assists DSS with issues involving compliance with court orders,
welfare, juvenile justice and child support.
expediting provision of services, guidance on agency policies, federal
? Attorneys provide legal services for the Department of Social and state regulations, immigration issues, and other issues affecting
Services (?DSS?) and the Department of Probation (?DOP?). permanency and the well-being of children.
? The FCB handles some of the most time- sensitive and stressful ? Participates as a member of both the County's Child Fatality Review
cases. and the Multi-Disciplinary Teams.
? Handles thousands of cases each year in the three Westchester Juvenile Justice
Family Courts, Supreme Court and before administrative tribunals.
? In the first six months of 2024, the FCB has remained steady in new ? The FCB investigates and presents cases involving juvenile
referrals as compared to the same time in 2023 (which was a 27% delinquency, juvenile offender and adolescent offenders and
increase over 2022). Even with the influx of new referrals, the FCB extensions on behalf of the people of Westchester County. In 2024,
had fewer attorneys than previous years. there was a 17% increase in cases referred to the FCB.
? Attorneys present violations of probation in Family Court on behalf of
the Department of Probation and provide information to victims of
Child Welfare
youth crime on available community-based services, including
counseling, crisis intervention and safety planning.
? Represents DSS in child neglect and abuse cases , extensions of
placement, termination of parental rights, foster care review ? Maintains a network of community based and county agencies who
can help to provide diversion services for juvenile justice involved
C-165


--- PAGE 216 ---

Department Of Law (18)
youth to be held accountable without disrupting their ability to lead improve public safety and enhance the quality of life of community
productive lives and contribute to their community members. Community out-reach represents a distinct departure from
the case and conviction orientation of traditional prosecution.
? Serves as a liaison and collaborates with various community based
Instead, the community outreach initiative seeks ways to prevent and
service providers and juvenile justice stakeholders on issues
reduce youth crime and improve public safety. This past year the
involving juvenile delinquency.
FCB has presented at various schools and community network
? Provides legal training to DOP on violations of probation and various meetings. It has also formulated partnerships with various Youth
police departments throughout Westchester at in-service training, Courts and was instrumental in aiding the Mt. Vernon Police
reviews certain DOP procedures to ensure compliance with state and Department with designing their own Youth Court. Additionally, the
federal law and responds to all requests for formal opinions regarding child support, child welfare and juvenile justice teams presented to
probation issues. stakeholders at the County's Domestic Violence Counsel. In 2024, for
the fourth year, the FCB will participate in the National Night Out
Child Support
Against Crime events throughout the County.
? The FCB provides representation of child support proceedings to Diversion Services
DSS and private petitioners under both the Uniform Interstate Family
Support Act (?UIFSA?) and section 111-g of the New York State Social ? Diversion programs are alternatives to initial or continued formal
Services Law. processing of youth in the juvenile delinquency system. The FCB has
worked with various Youth Courts and mediation programs to divert
? Initiates thousands of proceedings against non-custodial parents who
cases from formal prosecution since 2022. The FCB has expanded
fail to meet child support obligations owed either directly to the
its partnerships with community based programs in order to meet
County or to the individual custodial parents.
more of the needs of our court involved youth and to off ramp them
? Presents Uniform Interstate Child Support cases in family Court on from prosecution and perhaps deeper into the justice system. One
behalf of out-of-state custodial parent petitioners who are seeking to such endeavor was the partnership with the Mount Vernon Police
establish paternity and obtain child support from Westchester Department in forming their own Youth Court. Since 2022, the FCB
residents. was instrumental in helping to get this Youth Court operational and
has recently used the program for diversion services. Additionally, in
? Appears on paternity cases, modification cases and prosecutes non-
2024 the FCB has participated in endeavors through the Annie E.
custodial parents who willfully fail to meet their support obligations.
Casey Foundation to expand diversion opportunities in the City of
Specific Accomplishments: Yonkers. Bringing together community based organizations in this
specific area has been critical in meeting the increasing demand of
cases referred from the City of Yonkers.
2024 Ongoing Initiatives: Updates
Victim's Services
Community Outreach
? Since 2022, the FCB was successful in collaborating with community
? In 2021, the FCB established a community outreach program and based partners such as WESTCOP and other county agencies to
since then endeavored to expand the program that involves a long- expand the network of services offered to victims of youth crime,
term, proactive partnerships among the Law Department, law including, but not limited to: safety planning, therapeutic
enforcement, the community and public and private organizations. interventions, assistance with victim services applications, medical
The purpose is to use the authority of the FCB to solve problems, bills and counseling expenses, lost wages and other types of
C-166


--- PAGE 217 ---

Department Of Law (18)
assistance. The Bureau is now able to refer crime victims for services Technology Department and the District Attorney's Office have
routinely and continued to do so throughout 2023. collaborated to develop a digital discovery process for juvenile
delinquency cases using a portal to collect and distribute discovery.
Youth Part Collaboration
In 2023, that program has been developed and is currently partially in
use by the FBC in preparation for full implementation by the end of
? Over the past few years, the FCB implemented the groundbreaking
2023. This portal will be used by the FCB attorneys to receive
Raise the Age legislation incorporating youths who are 16 and 17
evidence, paperwork, videos, etc. from law enforcement
years old youths into the juvenile justice practice and worked closely
electronically. This will allow for easy review, redaction and storage. It
with all stakeholders. The FCB endeavors to work in conjunction with
will also allow for easy service upon defense counsel without the
the Westchester County District Attorney's Office to develop a plan to
need for USB drives, CDs, etc. In 2024, the portal was fully
screen and draft cases involving youth who are accused of felony
implemented within the FCB and has added to the productivity of the
crimes. Since the vast majority of Youth Part County Court cases are
juvenile delinquency unit.
transferred to Family Court, the FCB endeavors to have early access
to these cases and, when appropriate, draft and appear in the Youth Professional Development Opportunities
Part prior to transfer. This will ensure that the proper charges are
drafted and the transfer occurs expeditiously and efficiently. The FCB ? The FCB has implemented the use of Legal Files to track cases
has appeared in the Youth Part many times in 2024 in order to aid the electronically and has implemented case review over the last year in
Court adding to its case responsibilities. order to enhance professional development and accountability. In
order to maximize professional development and retention, the FCB
? The FCB has appeared in the Youth Part many times in 2024 and
endeavors to establish a committee of attorneys and support staff to
works closely with the DA's Office to collaborate on evidence review
consider professional development, quality of life and other changes
and charging decisions in order to aid the Court. The two agencies
the FBC could make to support and retain staff. To support
collaborate in order to ascertain case viability, appropriate charges
implementation, the FCB is reviewing best practices adopted by
and make detention determinations.
different jurisdictions and will use this information to improve
Juvenile Delinquency Discovery practices countywide. The FCB has implemented Bureau-wide case
review, uses the electronic case management system, Legal Files
? On April 1, 2019, New York State passed sweeping criminal justice extensively in order to track assignments and manage caseloads.
reform legislation, including discovery reform, requiring prosecutors The FCB also implemented a small, second-seat program targeted at
to disclose their evidence to the defense earlier in case proceedings. training the less experienced lawyers. In 2024, that has expanded
The discovery reforms went into effect January 1, 2020 and were due to the need to train new attorneys in the practice. Here, they
amended in April 2020. Similarly, the New York State legislature is team up with more experienced attorneys in order to develop trial
proposing a similar bill for juvenile delinquency proceedings that will skills and lean new areas of the law. The FCB will expand this
affect the FCB significantly. The reformed law requires significantly program in 2025.
greater openness and establishes specific timeframes for the sharing
Training Opportunities
of evidence between the Presentment Agency and defense during
the pretrial period. As a result of the prior legislation, District
? Throughout the past four years, the FCB continues to provide
Attorney's Offices created electronic and digitized methods for
extensive training for attorneys, continual updates on judicial
dealing with the volume of evidence and the ensuing disclosures to
decisions and changes in the law and ongoing training for all legal
defense counsel. In 2022, in anticipation of the change in law and
staff, including training in ethical responsibilities. The FCB instituted a
based upon the FCB's close collaboration with the District Attorney's
monthly Lunch and Learn series which has covered numerous topics
office regarding Youth Part cases, the FCB, the Information
C-167


--- PAGE 218 ---

Department Of Law (18)
throughout the year. The FCB will continue to develop additional to review such evidence along with other surveillance videos. This
training opportunities for both attorneys and support staff. In 2024, has a profound effect on the amount of work which is done by the
the FCB has already completed four separate major trainings. FCB team for each and every case adding numerous hours of work
Additionally, in 2024 the FCB worked with the Court Improvement to each case.
Project to provide two legal trainings on child welfare issues for the
SCR Reform
County.
Family First Legislation ? At the start of 2022, legislation went into effect that changes how
New York State's Statewide Central Registry (SCR) operate. It raised
? The Family First Prevention Services Act was signed into law as part the standard of evidence required for the system to list a person on a
of the bipartisan budget act and went into effect in New York in late registry with an indicated case. SCR record for indicated cases of
2021. This act reforms the federal child welfare financing streams, neglect or maltreatment now will be sealed after eight years, instead
Title IV-E and Title IV-B of the Social Security Act, to provide services of up to twenty-eight years. If you win at trial in family court or your
to families who are at risk of entering the child welfare system. The case is dismissed, you no longer have to go through a separate
bill aims to prevent children from entering foster care by allowing process to clear your SCR record-it will be amended and sealed
federal reimbursement for mental health services, substance use automatically. Now, when you challenge your SCR record in a fair
treatment, and in-home parenting skill training. It also seeks to hearing, you always can present evidence that the allegation is not
improve the well-being of children already in foster care by relevant to employment. In 2022, the FCB had to adapt to this reform
incentivizing states to reduce placement of children in congregate in the child welfare area and trained DSS in the new law. In both
care. In the New York implementation of the act, the Family Courts 2024 the FCB has prevailed on over 60% of these hearings despite
are now charged with additional duties to review the congregate the higher standard implemented in the 2022 law (an increase of
placements. This review has added additional court appearances 10% since 2023).
and litigation in both the child welfare and juvenile justice areas.
Cross Over Youth Initiative
? Giglio and Discovery Obligations
? The Crossover Youth Practice Model (CYPM) is a multi-agency,
? Giglio material is a well-known term among law enforcement. Giglio
cross-system practice model that aims to address the needs of youth
v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, is a 1972 Supreme Court case
involved in both child welfare and juvenile justice systems. Its core
involving the prosecution's obligations in regards to criminal
goal is to reduce further youth involvement in the juvenile justice
discovery and disclosure. In Giglio, the Court held the prosecution is
system in a manner that is consistent with the needs and best
obligated to disclose all information or material that may be used to
interests of the youth and the need for the protection of the
impeach the credibility of prosecution witnesses (including situations
community. The FCB will endeavor to begin a CYPM model in
where police officers act as witnesses for the prosecution). As such,
Westchester County by engaging the Department of Social Service,
in the last several years, the FCB has increased its work around
the Department of Probation and the family court system to create a
gathering information which may impact the credibility of its
model, which seeks to achieve the following four overarching goals:
witnesses including gathering lawsuit and disciplinary information
and turning it over to defense counsel. As the case law evolves in 1. Reduction in the number of youth crossing over and becoming
New York, so does the FCB's obligations. In order to comply with the dually-involved;
law, the FCB staff must do extensive research into a witness'
background including any and all lawsuits and disciplinary actions. 2. Reduction in the number of youth placed in out-of-home care;
Additionally, as more and more police departments outfit their officers
with body worn camera, the FCB must expand its work on each case 3. Reduction in the use of congregate care; and
C-168


--- PAGE 219 ---

Department Of Law (18)
4. Reduction in the disproportionate representation of youth of out-of-home placements as cases drag on sometimes for years.
color, particularly in the crossover population Limited contact with parents and frequent changes in care jeopardize
infant development, and signs of developmental delays are often not
5. The model will coordinate efforts amongst child welfare and identified or addressed. In addition, the complex needs of birth
juvenile justice arrears in order to reduce the number of youth parents are not comprehensively assessed, resulting in inadequate
going further into the juvenile justice system. or inappropriate service plans. Through the FCB's participation in this
program we can: ensure that infants and parents receive
Second Chair Program comprehensive screening and assessment at entry level into the
child development services, adult development services and services
? A second chair program is a training and mentoring program for required for family stability; and shift from an adversarial to a
attorneys. Second chair means a lawyer who helps the lead attorney collaborative approach in addressing the needs of families.
in court. The services of second chair includes examining some of
State Wide Juvenile Justice Training
the witnesses, arguing some of the points of law, handling parts of
the voir dire, and presenting the opening statement or closing
? Juvenile court judges and practitioners are the most important public
argument. Hence, second chair offers every level of training, support,
figures in the juvenile justice system-they decide whether youth
and consultation for the trial attorney preparing a case for trial. A
become court-involved each year and for how long, whether youth
second chair can execute any task as long as it is done under the
are involuntary removed from their homes and communities, and
supervision of an attorney on the list. The FCB will institute a formal
which services they receive. Because of the important role the play in
second chair program in order to give the more junior attorneys an
their communities, it is vital that they receive comprehensive training
opportunity to hone trial skills and give the more senior attorneys an
on juvenile justice issues. The FCB will be partnering with the Judicial
opportunity to teach and mentor. Each area of the FCB will institute
Institute to develop a comprehensive state-wide training on juvenile
this program in a formal way to ensure everyone has an opportunity.
justice, including topics of reform initiatives and changing the law.The
With the increase of new attorneys joining the FCB in recent years,
symposium will provide state-wide leadership, coordination, and
the need for a second chair program has increased. The FCB has
resources to those working to prevent and respond to juvenile
instituted this program in order to aid in the professional development
delinquency and victimization.
of these attorneys.
Threat Assessment and Management Teams (TAM)
2025 Initiatives
? (TAM) teams are multi-disciplinary teams that bring together law
Strong Starts
enforcement, mental health professionals, school officials, and other
? The Strong Starts Court initiative brings expertise in early childhood community stakeholders to identify, assess, and manage threats of
targeted violence. These teams receive reports of concerning
development to all stages of Family Court proceedings and supports
behavior by individuals, gather additional information, assess the risk
infants, toddlers, caregivers, and families so that the court becomes
of potential violence and then develop intervention and management
a catalyst for positive change in the lives of the youngest children.
strategies to mitigate the risk of violence individuals displaying the
The Strong Starts Court was developed in response to gaps in the
concerning behavior pose. The teams seek to take a ?public health?
child welfare system and, after being piloted in the Bronx Family
approach by engaging a broad group of stakeholders to examine the
Court in 2015, has expanded to Westchester County. Children under
potential risk and protective factors at play and develop mitigation
the age of 6 make up a disproportionate percentage of those entering
measures that ideally resolves the concern before a crime is
the foster care system. The Strong Starts Court Initiative fills gaps in
committed that would necessitate direct law enforcement
the current approach to court-involved infants. Infants often remain in
C-169

